Executive Briefing Service 
Growing Enterprise Revenues 

 

 

 

 

 

Executive Briefing 
 
THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE 
THE I4T – THE INTERNET 
FOR THINGS 

It’s hard to make things work in the IoT. This report outlines why, what is needed, 
and  current  leading-edge  efforts  to  achieve  it.  To  deliver  the  benefits  of  the 
Coordination Age,  all  manner  of  "things"  will  need  to  be  able  to  discover  each 
other  and  communicate  more  autonomously.  For  this  to  happen  easily  and 
securely a new enabler is needed: the Internet for Things (I4T). 

 

Andrew Collinson, Partner and Research Director    |   andrew.collison@stlpartners.com   |   May 2019 
 

 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Executive Summary 

The  Internet  for  Things  (I4T)  will  unlock  a  new  wave  of  economic 
development 
The Internet was a powerful enabler of innovation and disruption in the Information Age because it 
allowed  so  many  different  players  to  discover  each  other  and  connect  in  totally  new  and  often 
unexpected ways with very little friction. 

A new enabler is now needed in the Coordination Age: the Internet for Things (I4T). This will perform 
a similar function to the Internet, but broaden the range of ‘things’ that can connect and interact with 
each other to include e.g. sensors, IT systems, companies, databases, people, machinery, lights, etc.  

This report draws two key conclusions on why we need an Internet for Things, and how it will develop: 

1.  Today’s Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure is insufficient: The  IoT as typically described 
today is a world of many silos, where partially interconnected things lack the ability to connect 
easily and securely across those silos when needed. To realise the full potential value of 
connecting all kinds of things, we need new tools to coordinate telecoms and Internet 
infrastructure across those silos. 

2.  The development of the I4T will be driven by businesses: The ultimate purpose of the I4T is to 
allow stuff made or operated by different companies to connect and communicate meaningfully 
with each other. Consumers will value the benefits of this as much as enterprises, but the onus 
will be on businesses to make it happen – in pursuit of a better customer experience – so most 
I4T interactions will have to be created at a business-to-business-to-other (B2B2X) level.   

It’s possible but not practical today 
Most IoT silos can be programmed to connect with each other, and the most advanced offer some 
interconnectivity  through  APIs.  However  this  is  an  expensive  and  time-consuming  process,  and 
typically works only for single specified applications. Every connection is effectively bespoke and a 
long way from an automatic, low-friction solution. 

Complex activities and ecosystems like smart cities can be coordinated too, but this typically requires 
a ‘master coordinator’ – a company or organisation that takes an over-arching and controlling role. 
This  can  be  both  unpopular  and  inefficient,  as  the  sub-ordinated  companies  resent  the  loss  of 
autonomy and the master coordinator requires exceptional knowledge, agility and finesse to succeed. 
The commissioning body, for instance a city council, also risks getting locked into a system that may 
be difficult to adapt to new needs over time. 

Standardisation  could  help  ease  interconnectivity,  but  standardisation  is  a  notoriously  long  and 
complex road, and typically works best for activities in a mature market where needs and requirements 
are well understood. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

2 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Why “of” needs to become “for” 
At present the main focus of industry is the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), but the purpose of the 
IIoT is mainly to connect and integrate companies’ internal (endogenous) data sources and devices. 
The I4T will be an ecosystem joining and building on these existing capabilities – with the purpose of 
enabling B2-any-B2-any-X. 

As noted above, the major challenge to overcome in connecting external (exogenous) data sources 
and  actors  is  agility  of  interoperation.  There  is  too  much  friction  in  the  two  existing  methods  – 
standards or bespoke solutions.  

Finding a simpler and more universal solution to this problem is essential to making the leap from the 
IoT, which makes existing individual processes more efficient, to the I4T, which will allow businesses 
to coordinate multiple processes and develop entirely new processes and services. 

By making it easier to bridge siloes, the I4T will enable businesses to gain much richer context about 
their operating environment – who else is operating in it, what services they provide,  what patterns 
they have spotted, how those could affect what’s happening. This will drive much more accurate and 
informed  decision-making,  for  everything  from  supply  chain  management,  to 
infrastructure 
management, to smart homes.  

The sheer volume of interactions means humans will not be able to manage or monitor them all, so 
the Internet for Things also gives connected things (in the broadest definition of ‘thing’) the ability and 
autonomy to make (some) decisions for us. In this sense, it is an evolution from the Internet, which is 
for people to do things more efficiently for themselves. 

In industry, the strongest initial needs driving such solutions are in areas with high value but relatively 
temporary needs such as emergency services and construction. These two in particular stand out 
because their needs relate to critical human safety, yet current solutions remain unreliable. 

Escaping the barrier of platform dominance 
It’s become an implicit mantra of modern management philosophy that being the dominant platform 
owner is a strategic nirvana in the GAFA playbook. 

It’s certainly good for the dominant platform owner. The problem is, it’s not necessarily that good for 
everyone else in the economy. The clue is in the word dominant. It means that others are out of control 
of their own destiny, and that is not an aspiration for many individuals or organisations. 

In a nutshell: nobody particularly wants to be coordinated by someone else. 

Plus in practical terms, there are simply probably too many vested interests and embedded systems 
for a single dominant platform play. Pretty much everyone in the IT business is involved somewhere, 
from the Internet/cloud players (e.g. Google, Amazon, etc.), major IT players (e.g. Oracle, IBM, etc.), 
industrial specialists (e.g. GE, Schneider Electric, PTC, etc.), and so on.  

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

3 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Each has their own angles and strengths, and many have deep and hard to replicate specialisms and 
industry relationships. Yet none are ideally placed or suited to deliver or manage an I4T interface, partly 
because other players won’t want to cede ground to them, and partly because they are simply not 
today in business or designed as organisations to do this.  

But how to open up without giving everything away? 
The key challenge is how to open interactions between existing networks and platforms in a managed 
way.  It  remains  uncertain  exactly  how  this  will  be  achieved,  although  there  are  two  types  of 
organisations currently driving efforts in this direction: 

1.  Various interoperability forums, such as the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), are trying to 
establish standard practices. In our view, these are unlikely to work in the short term, if ever. 

2.  An emerging category of translators / facilitators focused on making IoT data more searchable, 

and developing easy solutions for managing access rights. A key technology these companies 
are leveraging that may catalyse a true I4T is digital twins. Today, digital twins are primarily used 
to make industrial processes more visible and cost-efficient. But by creating a layer between the 
actual ‘thing’ and other participants in a connected ecosystem, digital twins may be able to 
deliver the optimal balance between security and openness. The I4T may therefore materialise in 
the form of ‘dating services for digital twins’. Pioneers in this space include Iotic Labs and 
Thingful. 

Is there an opportunity for telcos? 
This  report  outlines  specific  drivers  and  use-cases  for  the  Internet  for  Things,  and  gives  a  brief 
overview of interoperability forums and pioneers in the field of ‘dating services for digital twins’, either 
or both of which may create the I4T… or not. 

The next questions that this analysis raises are:  

•  Do telcos have a role here beyond connectivity? 

•  How much of an opportunity for telcos is the Industrial Internet of Things? 

•  What should telcos do as a consequence?  

Helping ‘things’ find and communicate with each other sounds like it could be a telco role. But it is 
unclear yet if that’s realistic. After all, telcos don’t do this in the Internet.  

Either way, telcos should be aware of the possibilities of the Internet for Things, as it will become a 
major enabler in the digital economy overall. STL Partners therefore plans further reports on: 

•  The options for telcos and others in the Internet for Things 

•  The Industrial Internet of Things: how it’s evolving and what the opportunity is 

•  Digital Twins: What they are, why they matter, and what to do  

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

4 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................................... 2 

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................. 7 

Credits .................................................................................................................................................................. 7 

The Internet for Things and the Coordination Age ....................................................................................... 7 

How does an “Internet for Things” fit with this? ........................................................................................... 9 

What’s wrong with the Internet of Things? .................................................................................................. 10 

The essential components of an Internet for Things ................................................................................ 10 

What is the Internet for Things (I4T)?............................................................................................................... 12 

How is an Internet for Things different to an Internet of Things? ........................................................... 12 

Advantages – what can the “Internet for Things” offer? ........................................................................... 13 

What problems does the I4T solve? ................................................................................................................. 15 

Problem 1: The use case paradox ................................................................................................................. 15 

Problem 2: No one really wants to be coordinated by someone else .................................................... 17 

Problem 3: A classic case of warehouse interruptus ................................................................................ 18 

Two approaches to creating the I4T…so far ................................................................................................... 21 

Interoperability forums .................................................................................................................................... 21 

Dating services for digital twins .................................................................................................................... 22 

Civil engineering: Making all the pieces work together in real life ........................................................... 26 

Conclusions: It’s a tough job – but somebody’s got to do it ........................................................................ 29 

Index ....................................................................................................................................................................... 30 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

5 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Table of Figures 

Figure 1: The three ages of telecoms / ICT ....................................................................................................... 8 

Figure 2: The well-worn path of slowing telecoms growth ............................................................................ 9 

Figure 3: Some examples of what a “thing” can be ....................................................................................... 12 

Figure 4: Players in the logistics ecosystem example .................................................................................. 19 

Figure 5: Three functions of digital twins ........................................................................................................ 23 

Figure 6: A possible Internet for Things (I4T) ecosystem ............................................................................ 24 

Figure 7: Iotic Labs “Lego” .................................................................................................................................. 26 

Figure 8: BAM Nuttall and Iotic’s learning camera application to monitor machines ............................. 28 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

6 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Introduction 

Credits 

The  reports  analysis  and  conclusions  are  the  author’s  own.  I’d  also  like  to  thank  STL  Partners’ 
consulting  team,  who  were  kind  enough  to  share  some  of  their  research  learnings  on  enterprise 
applications of digital twins. I would also like to credit and thank Bob Machin, formerly of CSG and 
now of Matrixx, who did some of the initial research and writing. 

The Internet for Things and the Coordination Age 

In our recent research report The Coordination Age: A third age of telecoms, STL Partners described 
how the global economy is moving into a new age: the Coordination Age.  

This  is  driven  by  a  global  need  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  resource  utilisation,  arising  from  a 
combination of developments in both demand and supply. In terms of demand, there are pressing 
needs from all customers to make less do more. On the supply side, technologies like AI, automation, 
‘digitisation’, NFV/SDN, and potentially 5G, provide a smarter and more flexible way to do things. 

The consequence is that coordination is the job that needs to be done across many market areas. 
People, things and information need to be brought together at the right time and in the right place to 
deliver the desired outcome. 

Examples include: 

•  Smart home: devices, sensors, appliances and applications created by many different 

companies need to be coordinated into an easy-to-manage solution for consumers (see our 
latest report Can telcos create a compelling smart home?) 

•  Healthcare: where clinicians, patients, treatments, resources and information need to be 

coordinated for successful healthcare outcomes (see Telcos in health – Part 1: Where is the 
opportunity? and Part 2: How to crack the healthcare opportunity) 

•  Transport: coordination is needed to manage transport flows for both public and private 

transportation, to ensure the best use of available resources and where to direct investment 
most effectively 

• 

• 

Logistics: to manage the distribution and delivery of stock and produced goods across highly 
complex, international supply chains 

Industry: to ensure that manufacturing and supply-chain processes deliver, assemble and 
process goods and materials efficiently 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

7 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

The best description we’ve come up with for the common need across these areas is “to make our 
world  run  better”.  It’s  not  a  generic  do-gooding  mission,  it’s  about  improving  what  people  and 
companies get for their time, money, effort and attention. 

It’s an over-arching principle (or meta-trend) that makes sense of, and gives direction to, the many 
technology led ideas like “Internet of Things”, "Industry 4.0", and others.   

But … so what? 
It matters because to have a winning strategy first requires a superior (or at least appropriate) mental 
grasp of the environment, or frame of reference, for that strategy. 

Put another way, if you don’t understand how the new game is being played, how can you possibly 
win? 

Telcos frequently missed this trick in the previous 30-year transition into the Information Age. 

Figure 1: The three ages of telecoms / ICT 

 

Source: STL Partners 

Over the last 30 years, telcos have continued to think, talk and act like network builders. Consequently, 
telcos did well out of the broadband and mobile data revolution, but they largely missed out on the 
services that make use of the raw connectivity and turn it into something more useful. 

There  are  numerous  examples  of  changes  the  Information  Age  brought  to  communications, 
information  discovery,  and  commerce.  These  new  ways  of  doing  things  have  ultimately  been 
dominated by other players, like Google, Facebook, Apple, Alibaba and Amazon. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

8 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Sometimes, when telcos spotted those opportunities, they missed out because they applied old-style 
business model approaches in the new world. For example, they often tried to make payments and 
early information products walled gardens and/or failed to grasp the need to collaborate with others 
to create a proposition with sufficient scale in practice (e.g. see  Apple Pay & Weve Fail: A Wake Up 
Call). 

We  discuss  the  reasons  why  telcos  missed  opportunities  in  more  depth  in  our  report  How  the 
coordination age changes the game. 

Now that growth is reaching the end of its cycle in communications (see Figure 2) telcos have a simple 
choice:  stay  as  a  pure  connectivity  player  in  a  flat  or  declining  market  or  develop  new  service 
propositions in addition. 

Figure 2: The well-worn path of slowing telecoms growth 

 

Source: STL Partners 

Whichever route they choose (connectivity only, or connectivity plus services), to succeed and grow 
going forward, telcos need to rethink their purpose and role in the economy.  

How does an “Internet for Things” fit with this? 

From about 1990 onwards, the internet was the catalyst for change and growth in the Information Age. 
By making a huge trove of new information – the World Wide Web – accessible and discoverable, and 
enabling the delivery of data at volume, it ultimately unlocked new business models, huge disruption, 
and digital transformation across the entire global economy. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

9 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

To move into the next age – the Coordination Age – a similar concept and mechanism is needed to 
be able to discover and access connected things1. 

What’s wrong with the Internet of Things? 

There’s a catch with what is currently called the ‘Internet of Things’: it isn’t an internet. It isn’t even a 
continuous network, and as such is severely limited in its capacity to grow, evolve in intelligence and 
capability, and deliver the benefits sought.  

The Internet of Things (IoT) originated as concept around the turn of the century and has been widely 
discussed since the early 2010s. Over that time many thousands of ‘smart devices’  and machine to 
machine (M2M) applications have been developed, creating efficiencies and enhancing functionality 
in  industries  as  diverse  as  agriculture,  logistics,  transportation  and  medicine.  Such  applications 
continue to increase and are often described as ‘the IoT’.  

However, most current applications are in reality closed (and private) command and control solutions 
using standalone technology  to  limited  ends  –  typically  to  enhance existing  industrial,  business or 
lifestyle functions – such as crop-watering applications that only turn on when the ground is dry, or 
lifestyle apps like Nest that allow remote control of household functions.  

In fact, most of what is commonly referred to as ‘IoT’ is simply an effective use of ICT, contributing to 
a growing world of connected things – but not constituting ‘an internet’, which is a searchable network 
of networks that allows users to find and connect to  any end-point for which they have appropriate 
access2.  

There’s a second problem. What’s really needed is not just an Internet of Things, but an “Internet for 
Things”. Interestingly, in one of the first mentions of the concept, that is precisely what it was called. 

"We need an internet for things, a standardized way for computers to understand the real world," 

Kevin Ashton, Auto ID Center at MIT from 19993  

The reason STL Partners thinks an Internet for Things (I4T) is a more useful concept today, is that to 
make some of the most complex and dynamic applications of the Coordination Age work, “things”, 
including not just sensors but also IT systems, will need to be able to find and communicate with each 
other relatively autonomously.  

The essential components of an Internet for Things 

A true Internet for Things, would be much more open than most current IoT systems, and would: 

                                                        

1A suitable level of security and manageability is obviously required too. More on this later. 
2 Places on the Internet may be freely viewable to all comers or need permissions such as user IDs and passwords, for example.  
3 Kevin Ashton was a Procter & Gamble Executive who headed the MIT Center at the time:   
https://www.forbes.com/global/2002/0318/092.html#7a164e0f3c3e. He is regarded as the author of the term “The Internet of Things”,  
https://iot-analytics.com/internet-of-things-definition/  

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

10 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

•  Allow discovery of previously unknown sources (e.g. through a search engine), and interactions 

between communities of things within public or private domains.  

•  Allow ‘things’ (including IT processes and software as well as devices) to discover each other 
within certain predefined rules or protocols, rather than either being given carte blanche to talk 
with any strange device, or being firmly controlled by a single, central authority. 

•  Contain data that is published, searchable, and accessible to anyone – or anything – with the 
appropriate security access. It would bring data from machines, sensors and other intelligent 
things into the sharing economy and semi-public domain.  

It could also open the door to much more radical initiatives that would combine data  from multiple 
sources to deliver outcomes as yet unconceived of – perhaps triggering further revolutions in terms 
of efficiency, productivity and innovation.  

So why isn’t there an Internet for Things that works more like the world-wide web, but in a machine-
based context?  

Many companies implicitly recognise the limitations of today’s IoT and are working on solutions to 
overcome them, some of which are covered in this report, while others will be examined in upcoming 
reports on Digital Twins and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). This report details further what an 
Internet for Things is, how it differs from what is described as the Internet of Things, its benefits, and 
some of the steps that have so far been taken towards it.  

 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

11 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

What is the Internet for Things (I4T)? 

How is an Internet for Things different to an Internet of 
Things? 

Before considering what it would take to create an Internet for Things, it is useful to understand what 
is currently meant by the expression the “Internet of Things” (IoT).  

First, what is a “thing”? 
The classic concept of an IoT “thing” is a sensor, or a connected device like a doorbell or machine in a 
factory. In STL Partners’ view this definition is too limited for the range of real world applications, and 
the “thing” being connected may be, for example: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

a bit of data from a single sensor (e.g. the temperature measured by a given sensor, on an 
aircraft, at a specific time) 

an aggregated result from a set of sensors (e.g. the average temperature near to a runway in an 
airport) 

an industrial process (e.g. a status check on the maintenance needs on an aircraft’s tyres)  

a consumer process (e.g. an app predicting the likely time of arrival of a flight). 

Figure 3: Some examples of what a “thing” can be 

All of these are effectively “things” and their operators may need or wish to share or access this data 
at any time.  

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

12 

 

Source: STL Partners 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

The Internet of Things 
Most simple definitions of the IoT describe the connection across the internet of computing devices 
embedded in everyday devices and machines, such as sensors and actuators, enabling them to send 
and receive data, be monitored, adjusted, switched on and off and so on. 

This  describes  something 
like  conventional  point-to-point  or  client/server 
communications than the Internet with which most people are familiar via the world-wide web.  The 
Internet is a relatively open space, in which participants and resources can be identified  in various 
searchable ways – through IP addresses, email addresses, URLs etc. – and located and engaged with.  

is  more 

that 

The openness of the world-wide web makes the volume and nature of possible connections between 
IP-enabled entities almost infinite. The interactivity between connected things in the IoT, on the other 
hand,  is  generally much more limited.  It might  be  better  described  currently  as  a  world  of  partially 
connected things.  

What is an “Internet for Things” (I4T)? 
STL’s definition of an ‘Internet for Things’ is as follows:   

The Internet for Things (I4T) is an open network of participatory, connected devices, objects, processes 
and entities. I4T entities can be located and interacted with according to their assigned security and 
privacy settings.  

Advantages – what can the “Internet for Things” offer? 

An Internet for Things would not just be a collection of smart devices. It would be a digital enabling 
fabric  for  wholly  new  functionality,  of  potentially  great  benefit  to  individuals,  enterprises  and  our 
environment.  

•  An Internet for Things would allow data to be combined and enriched in previously inconceivable 

ways – mashing up intelligence from different and seemingly unconnected sources for 
informational, security and commercial purposes.    

• 

It would enable more meaningful machine to machine conversations. One device might offer 
enhanced functionality by deriving important contextual information from other communicable 
entities or devices in its environment.  

−  To take a simple example, an in-building climate controller might offer more accurate control 
based on data taken from security devices, if it could combine data from sources within its 
network, such as security devices and thermostats, with external sources such as personal 
smartphones and smart watches, to determine which parts of the building should be 
heated/cooled, or local weather forecasts, in order to adjust settings in anticipation of 
changing temperatures.  

• 

It would trigger a leap in the volume and quality of intelligence available to individuals and 
agencies. All kinds of “things” – buildings, vehicles, infrastructure elements, people – become 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

13 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

data points and data sources, some static, some mobile, all contributing to a vast, searchable 
pool of crowd-sourced information. This could be mashed and downloaded on demand to create 
new intelligence for users working in areas unrelated to the source data – e.g. climate data being 
a driver for predicting cinema attendance figures, in turn used to review film release dates, 
trigger ice-cream orders and so on.4   

•  The potential of the Internet for Things is emerging just as the world is facing massive 

challenges in terms of the use of its resources as we’ve outlined in The Coordination Age: A Third 
Age for telecoms. These resources and issues range from industrial productivity, climate 
change, water shortages, major weather events, the move to renewable sources of energy, air 
pollution and garbage disposal, to name only a few.  

 

 

                                                        

4 One key challenge with making the I4T work well will be in determining how to the “things” know what is valuable information that should 
be included in a decision, versus what is superfluous or even detrimental. This is a big challenge in AI in general – when machines are more 
autonomous, how do we ensure that they are not perpetuating and enhancing our human biases? How do we express the desired outcome 
clearly, so that there aren’t unintended consequences? While we do not explore this risk further in this report,  we recognise that it is an 
unavoidable challenge of a more connected and autonomous world. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

14 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

What problems does the I4T solve? 

In  this  section,  we  consider  some  of  the  general  problems  that  occur  today  in  the  processes  of 
innovation and coordination. These are what we see as the fundamental needs of the market  – and 
those that an Internet for Things would help solve.  

To bring it to life, we use a number of different examples based on real-world needs and applications 
to illustrate a very small slice of the many different possibilities.  

Problem 1: The use case paradox 

A classic way of understanding a potential new technology or idea is to articulate use cases – real or 
hypothetical examples of the type of problems that it will solve. 

For the I4T, it is possible to identify lots of use cases. But there is a problem: each use case tends to 
lead to consideration of a highly bespoke solution and ecosystem.  

For example, the management of all street lighting in the City of London and Westminster has been 
outsourced by the Council to 3P energy management company. The original aim (or use case) was to 
save money and any data from the lighting systems simply go into a big 3P silo. If the council now 
wants to turn the lights on for a special event, it needs to contact the energy management company 
to ask them to turn them on. This was never envisaged when the original needs were specified, so 
requires a lengthy ad-hoc manual process.  

The use-case approach can also lead to an inadvertent focus on one area or market. The example 
above is a classic business use case. But what if the council wanted to make its lighting data available 
to other boroughs or departments, for example if the police wanted to gain a better understanding of 
the link between lighting and crime? By only thinking about narrow business use cases, you could miss 
an entire field of possible applications. 

So while a useful tool in thinking through applications of a new technology, the use case approach can 
accidentally  be  self-defeating,  and  lead  to  multiple  innovation  and  ecosystem  cul-de-sacs.  That 
doesn’t mean that solutions built on use cases don’t work and can’t be valuable, but that they are often 
only a first step in development. Needs will evolve, and closed, inflexible solutions that can only serve 
the initially anticipated need will usually be out-evolved by a more open system.  

This is analogous to the Internet. If, back in the 1980s, you’d tried to specify the Internet’s use case, it 
would  look  nothing  like  the  Internet  looks  today.  And  you  might  have  also  argued  that  your 
organisation’s closed IT system already solved that problem. 

The primary problems that the Internet solved are: 

1.  Discovery of information. You can now find a vast variety of information from diverse sources, 
and if your first choice of information doesn’t work, you typically have multiple alternatives that 
may be better suited. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

15 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

2.  Delivery of data in many different formats (text, video, audio, different file types, etc.). 

Over time, these capabilities have been combined in ways that have led to a massive profusion of new 
businesses and new business models. Direct retail to consumer existed5 before the Internet, but the 
Internet  took  it  to  a  completely  new  level.  Nobody  was  able  to  second  guess  these  benefits  and 
applications – the diversity of the new world it created was just too rich and complicated for all the 
possibilities to be thought through. It has taken 30 years to get to where we are today – and the pace 
of change and innovation is still staggeringly fast. 

The  point  is  the  slightly  mind-bending  paradox  that  describing  specific  problems  hides  the  over-
arching opportunity. 

Uncooking the IT spaghetti you just ordered 
To  see  how  the  existing  approach  of  defining  system  needs  through  specific  use  cases  is  failing, 
consider the following thought-experiment, loosely based on real-life situations. 

Consider a local council. One of its departments has approved roadworks on a cable project. In 
another department, a sub-contracted case worker needs to get to a vulnerable pensioner with 
heavy care equipment from the hospital. Where can they park without getting a ticket? 

You ask the IT department to put a system in place. The IT department needs to know exactly 
who, in which care company, and how to access their data. They need to access the local car 
park owner’s data too, and the hospital’s data – when, where and how is the equipment going to 
be available. Plus, where are the roadworks exactly, and where are the restrictions? This may be 
in council data, and/or there may need to be an update to or from the cable company contractor 
who is actually digging the roads to let them through. 

What format should the data be in? What is the security needed on each piece of data? Some 
providers can’t pass on some of their data unless they know what it’s going to be used for, and 
the compliance of partner systems.  

Let’s say the system to manage parking rights for social care support initially costs £1.8m, but you 
need to make changes because you didn’t specify it accurately, which costs another £0.5m. 

This is an illustrative picture. The reality is that there are many millions of these types of coordination 
issues to solve even just for one council, but the complexity and difficulty of solving the problem using 
current approaches is nightmarish, and many such projects fail. 

There needs to be a way to accurately and securely model all these complex relationships, but at 
low cost and without sharing the confidential data. Ideally, if the right data is available to be shared, 
then  the  council’s  millions  of  issues  can  be  addressed  –  and  who  knows  what  else  beyond  the 
council’s needs? Delays to couriers, school journeys, doctors’ visits, travel to work, etc.  

                                                        

5 For example, catalogue retail from high street retailers and others.  

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

16 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Imagine if public transport, cars, bikes and pedestrians can access and inter-relate with it too. What 
other  services  could  be  created?  What  other  data  could  be  added?  And  beyond  that,  what  about 
retailers, outdoor attractions? Services on air pollution, congestion. What else? 

These ideas are not new, but there is currently no realistic and economic way of achieving them. 

The project to solve project problems 
Going back to the imaginary council, it’s not hard to foresee that at some point after our first project 
comes to an end, another project is started to grant a building contractor access to a site that requires 
heavy traffic to turn through a busy school entrance. 

This  brings  into  play  another  set  of  companies,  organisations,  confidential  data  and  issues,  and 
nothing  from  the  first  project  that  is  any  use  whatsoever.  We’re  either  back  on  the  IT  spending 
bandwagon or the inefficient and slow paper route. 

Most councils across the world face significant cost and efficiency pressures. But the use case led 
approach is creating unwieldy and costly IT systems that aren’t helping as much as they might. 

Problem 2: No one really wants to be coordinated by someone 
else 

Another  classic  way  to  think  about  solving  the  coordination  problem  is  the  smart  city.  In  this,  a 
consortium of good folks all gather together to make a city work in a more efficient way6. 

A great idea, and a superb test-bed for a lot of current thinking. The problem is, it all ends up creating 
a huge data lake, out of which someone has to extract sense and a degree of order. 

Hence ultimately a need for a master-coordinator arises to try to pull all the information together and 
make  all  the  actions  work.  By  doing  so,  this  party  becomes  in  effect  a  type  of  controller,  and  the 
problem then arises that this controlling party, while it may be being paid by the civic authorities or 
some other body, takes on a position of power that no one else in the system is terribly comfortable 
with. 

This is one of the reasons that smart city projects tend to move very slowly after the initial optimism, 
and that few go beyond a few trials. 

 

 

                                                        

6 Examples include Singapore, Barcelona, Bristol and Manchester. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

17 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

The CxO’s dilemma 
This leads to a dilemma for the CSOs, CTOs, and CIOs of the enterprise world:  

1.  Do you want to employ a major ICT partner to control aspects of your connected digital world? 

And to place so much power and control over your organisation in the hands of a third party with 
its own agendas that are not necessarily 100% the same as yours? 

Or: 

2.  Must you and your organisation have a complete understanding and control of all the ins-and-

outs of your many digital systems and processes? And the costs, resources, challenges and 
responsibilities that entails? 

The simple answer is ‘no’. You don’t really want either.  

Somehow, you want the parts of your organisations’ value-chain / dynamic jigsaw puzzle to work with 
each other in a way that works best for you. You want visibility and control, and for the parts of the 
ecosystem to ‘play nicely together’ to rules that you’ve defined and understand. 

Should circumstances or needs change, you also want to be able to change things out without another 
massive transformation programme, and without your legacy partners making it as hard as possible 
to move forward. 

Problem 3: A classic case of warehouse interruptus 

As discussed earlier in this report, a fundamental challenge in today’s IoT is lack of interoperability 
between separate participants in a given business process. Logistics provides a good example of the 
challenges of communicating across siloes. 

Logistics and the delivery of goods is a fundamental process of the industrial ecosystem. Billions of 
components and finished goods of all sorts make their way around the globe in every economy. This 
happens in basic production, assembly, delivery throughout the supply chain, and ultimately also in 
recycling. 

Large modern warehouses are already highly automated to maximise efficiency and keep costs and 
delays to a minimum. The processes have been refined and redesigned over the years to try to extract 
every microgram of efficiency. 

So much so that such warehouses no longer have a light switch in them to turn the lights on and off. 
They are controlled from a central software suite and turned on when a consignment is expected to 
be delivered. A storeman will probably also be scheduled to be on site when the cargo arrives with 
instructions of which cargo to unload and where to store it. 

But  what  happens  when  the  lorry  is  delayed  by  weather  conditions?  Essentially  all  the  complex 
automation  grinds  to  a  halt  because  of  the  difficulty  of  connecting  all  the  component  systems. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

18 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Someone ends up having to phone up head office when the lorry arrives to turn the lights on, find a 
storeman, dig out the inventory and schedule from a system somewhere, and re-organise everything. 

Is this a big deal? While it sounds like a minor inconvenience, in an operation dealing with hundreds or 
thousands of consignments with significant value in some cargoes, and the potential knock-on effects 
of one unexpected change this can have a major impact on service delivery, profitability, and customer 
experience. 

It’s worth breaking down what happens to understand the nature of the problem. To simplify, let’s say 
the lorry belongs to a transport subcontractor – LorryCo. Most logistics chains will include numerous 
LorryCos,  all  independent  and  unrelated  to  WarehouseCo  (the  warehouse  operator),  and  delivering 
goods for multiple producers and sellers7. In this case, let’s assume it’s for one production company 
called GoodsCo8. 

Figure 4: Players in the logistics ecosystem example 

 

Source: STL Partners 

So, the lorry is going to be late. What are the options? 

•  Scenario 1: Although it’s technically possible for LorryCo to connect its data with WarehouseCo, 
both companies use different IT providers for their inventory and enterprise resource planning 

                                                        

7 Contracts and consignments may also be swapped at relatively short notice. This means that the relationships between LorryCos and 
GoodsCos are constantly varying and unpredictable. They are short-term and transient by nature. 
8 This is a considerable simplification, as for example, the driver may be self-employed or a subcontractor, as may the loader, and of course 
it does not include the impact of issues on further customers / players in the supply chain. So will the cargo of fruit arrive in time at the 
supermarket in the right condition, or part for the broken construction site equipment arrive in time to keep the multi-billion dollar project on 
track? We are excluding the needs of these players for the time-being to keep the example reasonably comprehensible. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

19 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

(ERP) systems, so getting them to communicate is a headache to organise. It is may also be 
more expensive to set up than the cost of managing delays.  

−  Also, WarehouseCo deals with hundreds of lorryCos and it doesn’t want to have to set up 

hundreds of interfaces. 

−  And this doesn’t even touch GoodsCo or the end customers for the delivery. 

•  Scenario 2: WarehouseCo and LorryCo are in the lucky situation that their separate IT systems 
providers have APIs which developers can use to share relevant information more easily. 
Nonetheless, those developers or systems integrators would still have to navigate the nuances 
of the data between the two platforms, and of course make sure that the internal systems of 
both LorryCo and WarehouseCo do what they are supposed to with the data when they have it. 

So what does the I4T need to deliver? 
What everyone in the supply chain wants and needs is for these things to  interact intelligently, and 
within desired parameters. 

•  WarehouseCo wants to know that LorryCo is running late in advance. It would ideally want to 
foresee this, which it might do by combining weather, traffic and direct data from LorryCo. 

•  WarehouseCo wants to be able to allow the right LorryCos to communicate with the relevant 

warehouses. To do this, a digital version of the warehouse needs to make itself findable to the 
LorryCos it wants to do business with. 

•  WarehouseCo wants to know if and when relevant lorries from LorryCo are going to arrive and be 
ready to process their cargoes. To do this, both WarehouseCo and LorryCo must be able to 
share certain aspects of their operational data in a way that makes the process work and 
satisfies security and privacy requirements of all concerned.   

• 

Ideally then, there would be a way for WarehouseCo to allow its warehouse to be “found” online 
by LorryCo’s lorry, both have their identities validated, and be able to exchange the requisite 
information. 

But how might this happen?   

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

20 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Two approaches to creating the I4T…so far 

Most Industrial Internet of Things solutions (see STL Partners’ forthcoming report) claim some degree 
of openness, offering APIs and interconnectivity – particularly between the systems within their own 
platforms or ecosystems. 

These systems are not truly open, in the sense that it requires considerable intervention to get different 
systems to talk to each other. This is not all bad – it’s essential from a security angle that not anyone 
can see or control a device. Yet it means that the full benefit of a truly open system – like the Internet 
as we experience it today – is not yet accessible to Industrial IoT systems, or indeed to IoT systems 
for the home, vehicles and other application contexts. 

Two approaches are emerging to try to close this gap: interoperability forums, and “dating services for 
digital twins”. 

Interoperability forums 

Parties working towards interoperability include, e.g.: 

•  The WWW Consortium (https://www.w3.org/): an industry-wide consortium which has the goal 
to ”lead the web to its full potential”, has an initiative to overcome the fragmentation of the IoT, 
called the “Web of Things” working group to develop standards. It says in its introduction9  

− 

“The Internet of Things (IoT) suffers from a lack of interoperability across platforms. As a 
result, developers are faced with data silos, high costs and limited market potential. This can 
be likened to the situation before the Internet when there were competing non-interoperable 
networking technologies. The Internet makes it easy to develop networked applications 
independently of those technologies. W3C is seeking to do the same for the Internet of 
Things.“ 

•  The Open Connectivity Forum – OCF, formerly also Allseen Alliance, IoTivity, Alljoyn 

(https://openconnectivity.org/): promotes an open source software framework that allows 
devices to communicate with other devices. It states its mission as to: 

−  Provide specifications, code and a certification program to enable manufacturers to bring OCF 
Certified products to the market that can interoperate with current IoT devices and legacy 
systems. 

−  Make the end user’s experience better by seamlessly bridging to other ecosystems within a 

user’s smart home and ensure interoperability with OCF compliant devices. 

                                                        

9 (https://www.w3.org/WoT/) 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

21 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

−  The OCF is primarily a device-centric organisation, and works well for applications based on 
small devices connecting into a wireless router, but less so for heavy-duty applications such 
as controlling a power station. It evolved from Qualcomm’s efforts to standardise chipsets in 
phones, and was intended to standardise between sensors in mobile phones.  

•  Open Interconnect Forum (http://i3forum.org/about/): The i3forum, established in 2007, is an 
organisation of the international telecommunications ecosystem that brings together all 
stakeholders (international carriers, vendors, enterprise service providers, etc.) in order to help 
define best practices, promote and foster adoption of industry transformation. It encourages 
innovation and competition. 

The standard problems with standards 
In theory, setting industry standards would be a great way to deal with this problem. 

In practice, the ‘agreeing standards’ approach is known to have a few well-worn roads to hell: 

•  Everyone has to agree to make standards work. This takes forever. There are so many different 

agendas and considerations that it is an incredibly difficult task to take on. 

• 

• 

• 

If you choose the wrong standard, you kill the category and all the businesses in it. Look at the 
history of Betamax videos, Wi-Max, etc. 

It’s not always necessary to agree the same standard everywhere. You don’t need trains that run 
on the London Underground to work on the New York Metro, or on a Japanese bullet train track. 

In the digital realm standards tend to work best at a more mature stage of industry development. 
Once all the wrinkles have been ironed out and the competing approaches have evolved into a 
stable ecosystem, then standards can be a feasible approach to help all players scale. 

So maybe one day standards of varying sorts will come about. But in the meantime, we don’t think it 
is the ideal solution. 

Dating services for digital twins 

Rather than either… 

•  Undertaking the complex and expensive process of having to specify which things can connect, 
and how they connect using internal or external development resources like the IT departments 
and/or an IoT platform… 

•  or waiting years for industry standards to catch-up with real-life needs…  

…a new set of offerings are evolving that allow things to find and interact with each other. 

The  concept  of  digital  twins  involves  creating  increasingly  sophisticated  visualisations  of  physical 
entities that can evolve to act as more than just a visualisation or model. As illustrated in Figure 5, the 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

22 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

fundamental principle is that the digital twin evolves to include components that allow control and 
management of its physical counterpart, and the ability to connect and communicate with other digital 
twins. (We will cover digital twins in greater detail in a separate STL Partners report.) 

Figure 5: Three functions of digital twins 

 
Source: STL Partners 

Hence digital twins could potentially be a key component of the Internet for Things, including in their 
remit  a  role  that  is  in  some  ways  equivalent  to  a  website  URL  –  a  digital  ‘address’  and  means  of 
communication for things.    

The  ‘dating  details’  available  to  other  twins  would  include  metadata  such  as  what  kind  of  data  is 
available, frequency, format, access rights, etc. 

STL Partners’ digital twins report will explain and explore this concept in greater detail. Focusing purely 
on the connectivity aspect of twins, one can imagine that a digital twins ecosystem could start to look 
as follows. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

23 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Figure 6: A possible Internet for Things (I4T) ecosystem 

  

Source: STL Partners 

In this regard, a new category of services that provide  intermediation between digital twins is also 
evolving. We call these ‘dating services for digital twins’ as we think this is the most comprehensible 
analogy. 

The dating services perform three basic functions: 

•  They allow digital twins to find other twins providing the kind of information they are interested in 

(i.e. the right frequency, cost, reliability, etc.) 

•  They provide a translation service to ensure that the language, entities and quantities 

communicated between the twins are consistent (e.g. translating temperature from Fahrenheit 
to Celsius, or vice versa) 

•  They provide an additional10 level of validation, security and privacy by allowing twins to stipulate 

what other types of twins can find and/or connect with them (a bit like ex-directory phone 
numbers).  

The  dating  services  don’t  maintain  the  connections,  or  any  aspect  of  the  relationship  between  the 
twins – they literally only perform the matching and introduction services.  Neither do they hold any 
customer data, other than the metadata required for the dating services. 

A new wave of disruptors – or enablers? 
We look at two examples of dating services for digital twins here in brief: Thingful and Iotic Labs. 

                                                        

10 The twins  may have their own security  and privacy  measures  like user-ids  and passwords  and other forms of validation so that only 
authorised third parties can access any secure layers. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

24 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Thingful  
Thingful  wants  to  be  a  search  engine  for  open  IoT  data.  Verticals  it  serves  include  weather, 
environment, smart city, energy and transport.   

“Thingful is a search engine for the Internet of Things, enabling secure discoverability & interoperability 
between millions of public & private connected objects around the world. Our mission is to enable an 
interoperable Internet of Things, in which connected objects find and use each other's data with the 
active consent of their owners. Thingful enables IoT data owners to control how their data is used, and 
empowers  them  to  make  more  valuable  and  effective  decisions  through  secure  cross-domain  IoT 
search & access.” 

Thingful is privately funded and has received support from Innovate UK, ODINE and The Open Data 
Institute. It was founded by Usman Haque, who founded Pachube (now Xively, acquired by Google IoT 
Cloud). 

How does it work? “The short answer is that this is still a semi-manual process. We have an automated 
and generalised scalable crawling and indexing engine, but it still requires some manual configuration 
when we encounter new data formats or protocols. There are, however, emerging standards for the way 
that IoT networks catalog their resources, and Hypercat is one that we have been involved in since the 
very beginning more than five years ago.” 

Iotic Labs 
Iotic Labs is another start-up with VC backing and was co-founded by Paul Green, formerly of Arkessa.  

Iotic’s website says:  

“Iotic Twins don't store data – they use secure, brokered interaction to model behaviour. Reducing costs, 
increasing revenue and getting to market faster with one-time integration for multiple applications. 

An Iotic Twin is a true digital twin. It is not a 3D model or visualization of an asset, but a through-life 
semantically defined virtualization of an asset. Iotic Twins are composites of data and controls able to 
model  behaviours  and  meaningfully,  programmatically  interact  with  other  twins.  The  interactions 
between  Iotic  Twins  removes  complexity  allowing  anything  to  interact  with  anything  across  your 
enterprise,  supply  chain  and  customers'  data  estates.  Interactions  between  Iotic  Twins  are  brokered 
with access control policies allowing granular control of enduring or transitory interactions.” 

STL Partners understands that Iotic is in many ways a form of the classic two-sided business model. 
It allows users and suppliers to connect and exchange data. 

Firstly, it is like eBay in that the participants can provide the metadata for the product (information) 
that they wish to share, and users can search for sources of data that they would find useful. Second, 
and  more  significantly,  it  provides  a  ‘twinning  environment’  that  brokers  data  and  controls.  This  is 
achieved in a cloud-based environment that maintains security and enables interoperability.  

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

25 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Iotic uses a visual analogy of Lego, characterising the many different IIoT systems (PTC, SAP, Azure, 
etc.) as different coloured Lego blocks in Iotic’s world, that Iotic is able to reassemble easily to create 
the desired outcome or model. 

Figure 7: Iotic Labs “Lego” 

 

Source: Iotic Labs 

Iotic allows users to subscribe to and receive data from the sources they seek for as long or as short 
a while as desired or permitted. It does not store data, but it can provide most recent data and enable 
a digital twin to become more data-rich than its real counterpart, for example by integrating third-party 
data. 

Civil engineering: Making all the pieces work together in real 
life 

Colin  Evison  is  Head  of  Innovation  at  BAM  Nuttall  (http://www.bamnuttall.co.uk/),  a  UK  civil 
engineering  company.  It  is  part  of  the  Royal  BAM  group  (https://www.bam.com/),  a  7  billion  Euro 
engineering  conglomerate.  BAM  Nuttall  has  a  long  and  distinguished  history  of  working  on  major 
construction and infrastructure projects, for example the London 2012 Olympics and the current UK 
Cross-Rail project. 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

26 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Colin’s  brief  is  to  find  innovative  ways  to  improve  his  company’s  efficiency  and  develop  new 
propositions and services for BAM Nuttall’s customers. He and his team are working with Iotic on a 
series of development activities with this goal in mind.   

As  a  civil  engineering  and  construction  company,  BAM  Nuttall  faces  many  challenges  common  to 
most industries. Construction is a very traditional industry, and things are often done a certain way 
because  they  always  have  been.  There  may  be  good  reasons  for  this,  and  safety,  security  and 
compliance are incredibly important in construction because the human and the financial costs can 
be very high. So new ideas must be proved carefully and convincingly. 

Also, the field operations of construction are very transient, as they are for many businesses. Major 
equipment is used on a project in one part of the company, and a week later it’s needed on a project 
20 or 200 miles away. The teams using it will be different, and the other companies and equipment on 
the two sites are likely to be quite different too. 

So BAM Nuttall faces a triple bind in terms of innovation:  

strong existing traditions and deeply embedded legacy systems;  

a high need for compliance;  

and a high degree of transience and non-conformity in each project.  

An IT manager’s nightmare, in other words. 

Colin explained that the UK Government has set high level aims for construction in terms of increasing 
productivity and reducing costs for 2025. While this is an incentive for innovation, Colin sees his task 
as “one, how can we improve productivity today, and two, how can we build on this to improve future 
projects?” 

“One of my first observations coming into the role (in 2017) was that we have all this equipment on sites, 
but no information about it, although many of the bits of kit do provide information back to their makers. 
We just didn’t collect or use it anywhere. Many of them offer us an app to monitor their bit of kit, but 
that’s not much use to us. I or the site manager doesn’t need 10 different apps, they need one that works 
with all the stuff.” 

There’s an example of some of the work Iotic is doing with Colin and the team at BAM Nuttall in this 
YouTube video. It shows how they’ve developed a camera-based system to monitor important kit (in 
this case a site compressor) that has no connected diagnostics. 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

27 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Figure 8: BAM Nuttall and Iotic’s learning camera application to monitor machines 

Source: BAM Nuttall & Iotic on YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GlEW71klAQk&feature=youtu.be  

 

While this is an application that many different IIOT providers could enable, Colin says the value of the 
Iotic approach is that it’s made it easy for the team to connect different applications and help them 
work together.  

Moreover, Iotic’s Sophie Peachey explained that the ability to connect external data sources is critical 
to making the applications work in real life for BAM Nuttall.  

“In the video you can just see part of the development of the compressor monitoring application. To 
make this app really work, we need site weather and other contextual data. For example, we need to 
know if it’s raining as a few drops of rain on the camera could completely change how the AI interprets 
the images. Plus this then connects up with a number of other applications and systems across the site 
and the company.” 

Another application in development recognises whether the wind speed on site is above a velocity that 
means crane operations are risky, and how to automate actions and alerts around this alert. 

  
 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

28 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Conclusions: It’s a tough job – but somebody’s 
got to do it 

The functionality envisioned in this report as ‘the Internet for Things’ will come about in the next few 
years. The needs exist now and the demand will get stronger as more organisations and people reach 
the same conclusions about the needs and opportunities of the Coordination Age. 

The only real question is how will it come about? 

This report outlines two approaches, and there are doubtless others. Ideas that spring to mind readily 
are, for example: 

•  That a similar industrial structure to the Internet or some extension of the Internet could arise 

•  One of the large distributed players like Amazon or Google could decide to enable and facilitate a 

connecting and enabling functionality along these lines 

•  Telcos could see this as a new opportunity to add value to the economy and acquire or develop a 

solution to deliver it 

Right now, the standards / ICT industry collaboration approach looks to be structurally  challenged. 
The incentives to co-operate are relatively low, and the rewards for individual success high. 

It’s possible, but also quite hard to imagine one of the major players really succeeding. The vested 
interests  are  stacked  against  the  ecosystem  favouring  a  powerful  existing  player  unless  the 
proposition is really compelling.  

Amazon could be well positioned here with its growing role in many ecosystems as a cloud player – 
and also with its logistics expertise and knowledge. 

Google also has reach into many interesting areas – maps, search, IoT, Cloud, AI and so on. 

Yet telcos could do something here too, though the challenge again is to imagine them collaborating 
at  scale  and  pace  in  such  a  way  that  would  achieve  market  traction.  And  there  is  an  increasing 
question as to whether enterprises actually trust telcos to deliver on complex new projects – vis the 
drives to create and own private 4G and 5G networks. 

So Iotic and Thingful – and any other such players – are in an interesting space. They may also find 
themselves targets for acquisition by one or more of the major players. 

Perhaps a company like Iotic, should it be able to scale, and license or federate it’s technologies/IP so 
that any player can use it in a compelling way, could galvanise this space. 

Right now, it’s still all up for grabs. 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

29 

THE IOT IS DEAD: LONG LIVE THE I4T – THE INTERNET FOR THINGS  |  MAY 2019 

Index 

5G, 7, 28 
AI, 7, 28 
Alljoyn, 21 
Allseen Alliance, 21 
Amazon, 3, 8, 28 
API, 2 
Arkessa, 25 
automation, 7, 18 
Bob Machin, 7 
Coordination Age, 2, 7, 10, 14, 28 
CSG, 7 
Dating services for digital twins, 23 
Digital Twins, 4, 23, 24 
digitisation, 7 
eBay, 26 
Enterprise  Resource  Planning  (ERP)  systems, 

19 
GE, 3 
Google, 3, 8, 25, 28 
Healthcare, 7 
i3forum, 22 
I4T, 2, 3, 4, 10, 12, 13, 15, 21, 24 
IBM, 3 
IIoT, 3 
Industrial Internet of Things, 3, 4, 21 
Information Age, 2, 8, 9 
Internet for Things, 2, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 

16, 23, 24, 28 

Internet of Things, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 21, 25 
IoT, 2, 10, 12, 13, 21, 23, 25, 28 
Iotic, 4, 25, 26, 27, 28 
IoTivity, 21 
Kevin Ashton, 10 
Logistics, 7, 18 
London’s City Airport, 27 
M2M, 10 
machine to machine, 10, 13 
Matrixx, 7 
NFV, 7 
Nuttall, 27 
Open Interconnect Forum, 22 
Oracle, 3 
Paul Green, 25 
PTC, 3, 26 
Schneider Electric, 3 
SDN, 7 
Smart City, 17 
Smart home, 7 
standards, 3, 21, 22, 23, 25, 28 
The Open Connectivity Forum – OCF, 21 
The WWW Consortium, 21 
thing 

definition of, 12 

Thingful, 25 
Transport, 7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© STL Partners 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE BRIEFING 

 

 

 

 

30 

 

 

 

Research 

Consulting 

Events 

www.stlpartners.com 

 

